hi this is pressure Locker there's an
interesting pattern if you multiply a
number that has only ones by itself if
you multiply number that has five ones
in it by itself you'll count up to the
number five in order and then you count
back down to one to create a palindrome
of the numbers in ascending and then
descending order this pattern will
continue for example if you want to
multiply a number which has nine ones by
itself you would count up one two three
four five six seven eight nine and then
you would count down eight seven six
five four three two one but what happens
when you have a number which has ten
ones
how would you multiply that by itself if
the pattern continues you would count up
to ten and then you count back down to
one if you had a number with eleven ones
in it you would count up to eleven and
then you count back down to one in this
video I'm going to show you a very real
way in which this pattern does continue
and you could say this is an accurate
representation of the multiplication but
since we write numbers in decimal form
we're going to want to carry over
whenever we have a result that's more
than 10 so when we have 10 ones in the
digit our actual result on a calculator
will be slightly different and the same
thing happens for any number when we
have more than 10 ones in the digit now
I'm going to show you how you can
actually get to these results even
though the pattern continues so to show
you how this pattern works I'm going to
use a method of multiplying numbers by
using lines I provided a link in the
video description for that and you can
check out the method I'm going to give
you a brief explanation so let's say you
want to multiply 11 by itself for the
number 11 we're going to draw one line
for each digit in the number so for the
leading one we draw one line and then
for the one in the unit's digit we draw
another line for the other number that
we're multiplying by we going to draw
lines in the opposite direction so for
this one we're going to draw one line in
the opposite direction
and for the other one we're going to
draw another line to get our result
we're going to count out the number of
intersections between the lines on the
very far right we look at the vertically
lined intersections and we have one in
the middle these two intersections are
vertically aligned so we have two
intersections and finally on the far
left we have one intersection so our
result of 11 times 11 is 121 so now
we're going to try and extend this
pattern so to do that I'm going to
redraw this diagram a little bit I'm
going to bring in these lines and we're
going to have exactly the same diagram
that's smooshed in just a little bit
we still have one two and one as a
result of 11 times 11 and the reason I'm
doing this is now we want to extend the
pattern let's say we want to multiply
111 we're going to add one more line and
if we change the second number to 111
we're going to add one more line again
so what have we done in this new figure
where we're multiplying 111 by itself
which intersections have we created
which are new well we created one
intersection on the far left then we've
added one intersection to each of the
columns that we've already had and then
on the far right we have one more
intersection so when we count up the
vertically aligned intersections we're
going to start out with one on the far
right then we have two then we have
three we again have two and then we have
one so you can see why we have a very
symmetrical pattern of intersections and
you can also see that we're adding one
intersection to each of the existing
numbers and then we're adding one on the
far left and the far right so 111 times
itself is one two three to one in fact
this pattern continues I'm going to show
you one more example so let's say we
wanted to extend this to
the number one to each of the numbers we
already have so we want 1111 we're going
to draw one more line for that and for
one thousand hundred and eleven and the
second number we do the same thing so we
draw our one line for our first number
and one line for our second number now
in order to use multiplying by lines
we're going to extend the lines we
already have so that we create the
intersections and we end up with another
lattice grid so which are the new
intersections we've created by adding
one to each number well you can see on
the far left we started out with one
intersection so that's the one which
begins our new multiplication product
we're going to add one to each of the
columns which we've already had in our
previous result and then finally on the
far right we add one more so we count up
the vertically line intersections we end
up with one two three four three two one
so you can see how this pattern
continues if you wanted to add a fifth
number one multiplying it by itself
you're going to add one more line on the
left one more line on the right and it's
going to increase each of the existing
columns by one and then we're going to
add one on each end so that's why this
pattern continues where we have
palindromic numbers that go up in
increasing order counting up the numbers
and then counting down so that explains
how we get up all the way to nine now
when we get to 10 you're going to see
visually that this pattern will continue
if you were to draw out that lattice
grid multiplying by lines you would see
that you would end up with one column
that had ten intersections so if you
represented numbers in this way you
actually could argue the pattern would
continue but since in decimal form we
never have a numerical digit that's more
than nine we're going to need to use
carryover so the column which has ten is
actually going to become zero that's
going to carry over to the left so that
the column which has nine will then
become ten we're going to carry that
over once more so that the column which
has eight becomes nine so we're going to
end up with the result one two three
four five six seven
oh that's none of that's affected that
eight needs to become a nine the next
two digits will become 0 because we have
carryover and then on the far right
we're still going to have nine eight
seven six five four three two one
that's still the same so similarly if
you have a number which has eleven ones
you actually would have multiplying by
lines a diagram that goes up one two
three four five six seven eight nine ten
eleven ten nine eight seven six five
four three two one
in order to get a number which would
match with the result on your calculator
we're going to need to use carryover
anytime we have a value more than nine
so we're going to need to carry over the
10 the 11 the 10 and we're going to
create this is not too difficult for you
to use carry over you would end up with
another pattern we go 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9
and then we have 0 1 2 0 and then we go
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 so you could use this
method to calculate multiplying any
number which has just ones by itself so
it's a kind of interesting way to see
why when you multiply number just with
ones by itself you end up with this
interesting pattern of palindromes
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
math and game theory you can catch
around my blog mind your decisions which
you can follow on Facebook Google+ and
patreon you can catch me on social media
at presh tell Walker and you like the
video please check out my books I
provided links in the video description